---
layout: default
permalink: Dialects/IREEDialect
parent: Dialect Definitions
title: "'iree' Dialect"
---

<!-- Autogenerated by mlir-tblgen; don't manually edit -->
# 'iree' Dialect
{: .no_toc }


A dialect used for types common across IREE subdialects.

1. TOC
{:toc}

## Type definition

### ptr

Pointer to a typed value.

### byte_buffer

A constant buffer of mapped host memory.

### mutable_byte_buffer

A buffer of read-write host memory.

## Operation definition

### `iree.do_not_optimize` (IREE::DoNotOptimizeOp)

Prevents compiler optimizations of a value.

Wraps any operands in an unoptimizable identity. This operation is declared
as having side effects, so no compiler optimizations will be able to reason
about it. This prevents its results from being folded. It will be dropped as
the final step in compilation.

#### Operands:

| Operand | Description |
| :-----: | ----------- |
`arguments` | any type

#### Results:

| Result | Description |
| :----: | ----------- |
`results` | any type

### `iree.dynamic_shape_constant` (IREE::DynamicShapeConstantOp)

A tensor constant that can have dynamic dimensions

Syntax:

```
operation ::= `iree.dynamic_shape_constant` $value attr-dict `->` type($result)
```


Allows specifying a constant where the return value can erase shape
information. This operation is declared as having side effects and has no
folder, so will not be optimized away by the compiler. The underlying shape
information should be hidden from the compiler and resolved at runtime.

```mlir
%c = iree.dynamic_shape_constant tensor<2x2xf32> -> tensor<?x?xf32>
%res = "xla_hlo.abs"(%c) : (tensor<?x?xf32>) -> tensor<?x?xf32>
```

#### Attributes:

| Attribute | MLIR Type | Description |
| :-------: | :-------: | ----------- |
`value` | ::mlir::ElementsAttr | constant vector/tensor attribute

#### Results:

| Result | Description |
| :----: | ----------- |
`result` | tensor of any type values

### `iree.placeholder` (IREE::PlaceholderOp)

A placeholder op to feed a value/buffer into computation

Syntax:

```
operation ::= `iree.placeholder` `for` $purpose attr-dict `:` type($output)
```


This op is intended as a way to represent a value or buffer that will be fed
into computation. It can host additional attributes related to the value or
buffer. This op can be used for the cases where one need to feed in value or
buffer to computation in a function but cannot do that via the function
argument due to ABI or contract issues.

#### Attributes:

| Attribute | MLIR Type | Description |
| :-------: | :-------: | ----------- |
`purpose` | ::mlir::StringAttr | string attribute

#### Results:

| Result | Description |
| :----: | ----------- |
`output` | any type

### `iree.unfoldable_constant` (IREE::UnfoldableConstantOp)

A constant that cannot be folded by the compiler.

Similar to a std.constant, but is declared as having a side effect and has
no folder. This is really just syntactic sugar as it is canonicalized to a
std.constant wrapped in an iree.do_not_optimize.

#### Attributes:

| Attribute | MLIR Type | Description |
| :-------: | :-------: | ----------- |
`value` | ::mlir::Attribute | any attribute

#### Results:

| Result | Description |
| :----: | ----------- |
&laquo;unnamed&raquo; | any type

### `iree.unreachable` (IREE::UnreachableOp)

unreachable assertion op

Syntax:

```
operation ::= `iree.unreachable` attr-dict
```


Signals to the compiler that the parent block should not be reachable.
This may be converted into a runtime assertion, though ideally they are
stripped during translation.

```mlir
^bb0:
  %true = constant true
  cond_br %true, ^bb2, ^bb1
^bb1:
  // Indicates that this branch should never be taken.
  iree.unreachable
^bb2:
  ...

```
