---
layout: default
permalink: Dialects/StringsDialect
parent: Dialect Definitions
title: "'strings' Dialect"
---

<!-- Autogenerated by mlir-tblgen; don't manually edit -->
# 'strings' Dialect
{: .no_toc }


A custom dialect supporting string operations.


The ops in this dialect are lowered to vm.imports to support a standard set
of string operations.
TODO(suderman): Add a reference to the intermediate string dialect.

1. TOC
{:toc}

## Type definition

### string

A string type containing a standard ASCII string.

### string_tensor

A tensor of string types.

## Operation definition

### `strings.gather` (IREE::Strings::GatherOp)

gathers all the strings from a Tensor by id

Gathers all the strings from a Tensor by ID.

#### Operands:

| Operand | Description |
| :-----: | ----------- |
`dict` | string_tensor
`ids` | buffer_view

#### Results:

| Result | Description |
| :----: | ----------- |
`result` | string_tensor

### `strings.i32_to_string` (IREE::Strings::I32ToStringOp)

converts an i32 to a string

Converts an i32 to its string representation.

#### Operands:

| Operand | Description |
| :-----: | ----------- |
`value` | 32-bit signless integer

#### Results:

| Result | Description |
| :----: | ----------- |
`result` | string

### `strings.print` (IREE::Strings::PrintOp)

prints the contents of a string

Prints the contents of a string.

#### Operands:

| Operand | Description |
| :-----: | ----------- |
`value` | string

### `strings.string_tensor_to_string` (IREE::Strings::StringTensorToStringOp)

converts a string tensor to a string

Converts a string tensor to a string.

#### Operands:

| Operand | Description |
| :-----: | ----------- |
`value` | string_tensor

#### Results:

| Result | Description |
| :----: | ----------- |
`result` | string

### `strings.to_string_tensor` (IREE::Strings::ToStringTensorOp)

converts a hal buffer to a string tensor

Converts a hal buffer to a tensor of strings representation.

#### Operands:

| Operand | Description |
| :-----: | ----------- |
`value` | buffer_view

#### Results:

| Result | Description |
| :----: | ----------- |
`result` | string_tensor
